HELM:

Helm is a package manager for kubernetes. it is used to build, deploy and manage application easily.

problems without helm:
1. defining/managing and executing multiple manifest file.
2. deployment ordering challenges
3. versioning and rollbacks for all resources.
4. environment-specific configuration files.

the above problems are resolved using helm.

helm chart can be created in two ways:
1. manually you can create the folder
2. using helm command

command to create the helm chart - helm create my-chart(chart_name)

if you want to see the structure of the helm chart then after creating it, go inside the helm chart and run tree 
command to the folder structure present in it but before that install the tree.

the files present in the helm chart is:
1. chart.yml - which contains the metadata about the project
2. charts - which contains the dependency information
3. templates -  which contains the manifest yaml files written in ginjar templates.
4. values.yml - which is used to pass values to the yaml file that are present in the template folder.
5. notes.txt - it is used to follow the instructions when the helm chart is deployed in k8s cluster
               for example: if you want to get the application url after the chart is deployed then that
               command is mentioned here.
6. helpers.tpl - which is used for reusable functions.

in the template yml files, they are 3 types of variables are present:
1. release - while deploying the helm chart, whatever name is given that name is taken here.
2. chart -  this values are coming from chart.yml file.
3. values - this values are coming from the values.yml file.

command to deploy the helm chart - helm install my-deployment .(path of helm chart here current directory) -n dev

command to list the helm deployments - helm list

if you have modified the helm chart and you want to apply the changes, command is - helm upgrade name_of_deployment path_of_helm_chart -n namespace_name

if you want to rollback to the specific version, command is - helm rollback name_of_deployment revision_number -n namespace_name

if you want to change some values in values.yml, but you don't want to go and modify in the helm chart then 
use this command - helm upgrade name_of_deployment path_of_helm_chart --set replicaCount=2 -n namespace_name

if you want to delete the helm_chart deployment, command is  - helm uninstall name_of_deployment -n namespace_name
i.e it will delete all the resources.

How to deploy helm chart to different environment:

   you create the separate values.yml file for each environment and while deploying the helm chart pass that 
   environment specific values.yml file.
   command is - helm install name_of_deployment path_of_helm_chart -f name_of_values.yml file -n namespace_name


command to package the helm chart - helm package name_of_helm_chart
i.e it will be packaged and you can upload anywhere and anyone can access it. basically it package as .tgz


NOTE:
https://artifacthub.io -> website for helm packages.

if you want to override the values.yml file values in commandline while deploying the helm chart then use -- set.
and then name that is mentioned in the values.yml file and it's value.

command -> helm install --set replicaCount=4 my-deployment .

if you have too many values then you can create yaml file and then pass it to helm command.

custom-values.yml:

replicaCount: 4
Name: my-Deployment

command ->  helm install --values custom-values.yml my-deployment .

if you want to download the helm chart from anysource -> helm pull helm_chart_name
it will download as tar file, you need to untar it -> helm pull --untar name_of_helm_chart



Interview Questions:

1. what is helm.
Helm is a tool for managing Kubernetes applications. It helps you easily deploy, manage, and configure software 
on Kubernetes by using pre-packaged templates called "charts." Essentially, it's like a package manager
for Kubernetes.

2.what are helm charts.
Helm charts are pre-configured templates for Kubernetes applications. They define how to deploy and manage
an app or service on Kubernetes, including its components, configurations, and dependencies. 
Think of them as reusable blueprints for setting up applications on Kubernetes.

3. what is the structure of a helm chart and what files are present in it.
 the common files and directories found in a Helm chart:
 
 Chart.yaml:
 This file contains metadata about the chart, like its name, version, description, and dependencies.

 values.yaml:
 A default configuration file where you can define values that can be customized during installation or
 upgrade (like image names, ports, etc.).

 charts/:
 This directory contains any dependent charts that the current chart relies on.

 templates/:
 Contains Kubernetes manifest templates (like Deployment, Service, ConfigMap) written in YAML. 
 These templates are processed using the values from values.yaml to generate Kubernetes resources.

 Chart.lock (optional):
 A file that locks down dependencies to specific versions (if any are used), ensuring repeatable installs.

 README.md (optional):
 A markdown file describing the chart, how to use it, and any important details.

4.how does the values.yaml file works in helm and why it is important.
  The values.yaml file in Helm is crucial because it defines the default configuration values for a Helm chart. 
  It allows you to customize the deployment of an application without modifying the chart itself.

 When deploying the chart, you can override the default values by providing a custom values.yaml file or 
 using --set commands to specify custom values, allowing flexibility and customization for different environments.

 why it is important:
 The values.yaml file is important because it separates configuration from the application code, making it
 easy to customize deployments. It allows you to change settings without modifying the chart itself. 
 This flexibility ensures consistent and repeatable deployments. It also simplifies upgrades and makes 
charts reusable in different environments.

5.what is a release in helm.
  A release in Helm is an instance of a Helm chart that has been deployed to a Kubernetes cluster.
  It represents a specific configuration of a chart with unique settings and can be upgraded, rolled back,
  or deleted. Each release is identified by a name, and you can have multiple releases of the same chart 
  with different configurations

6.explain what is helm release is and how it is different from a chart.
  A Helm release is a specific instance of a Helm chart that has been deployed to a Kubernetes cluster.
  It is the actual running version of an application that was created using a chart, with a particular
  configuration and name.

  helm chart:
  A chart is a package containing all the necessary Kubernetes resource definitions 
  (like deployments, services, config maps) and configuration templates.

   It is a blueprint or template for deploying an application.

  A chart itself doesn't contain any actual running application; it only defines the structure and configuration.

  helm release:
  A release is a deployed instance of a Helm chart on a Kubernetes cluster.

  It is a runtime representation of the chart, where you can customize its values 
  (using the values.yaml file or --set command).

  Each release is assigned a unique name and can be upgraded, rolled back, or deleted independently of
  other releases.

7.how do you install a helm chart
  
  1.Install Helm: Ensure Helm is installed on your system. 

  2.Add Chart Repository: Add a Helm chart repository (if needed) and update it. -> helm repo add <repo-name> <repo-url>
                                                                                    helm repo update


  3.Search for Chart (optional): Search for available charts using helm search repo. -> helm search repo <chart-name>

  4.Install the Chart: Use helm install <release-name> <chart-name> to install the chart. -> helm install <release-name> <chart-name> [--values <custom-values.yaml>]

  5.Verify Installation: Check the list of installed releases with helm list. -> helm list 

8.can you walk me through the process of installing a helm chart on a k8s cluster.
  
  1.Install Helm: Ensure Helm is installed on your local machine.

  2.Set Up Kubernetes Cluster: Make sure your cluster is running and kubectl is configured.

  3.Add Helm Chart Repository: Add the chart repository (e.g., official or custom) using helm repo add.

  4.Search for the Chart (optional): Use helm search repo to find the desired chart.

  5.Install the Chart: Run helm install <release-name> <chart-name> to install the chart.

  6.Verify Installation: Use helm list and kubectl get all to check the deployment.

9.how can you upgrade or rollback a helm release.  
 
   Upgrade: helm upgrade <release-name> <chart-name>

   Rollback: helm rollback <release-name> <revision>

10.what are helm repositories.   
   Helm repositories are storage locations for Helm charts, where you can find and share Kubernetes application
   packages. They can be public or private. You add them to your Helm setup using helm repo add, and
   search/install charts using helm search repo and helm install. Repositories make it easy to deploy and 
   manage applications on Kubernetes. 

11.how can you create your own custom helm repository.

   1.Package the Chart: Use helm package <chart-directory> to package your Helm chart.

   2.Host the Repository: Upload the chart package to a web server or use GitHub Pages to host it.

   3.Generate index.yaml: Run helm repo index <directory> --url <repository-url> to create the index file.

   4.Add Repository to Helm: Use helm repo add <repo-name> <repository-url> to add your custom repository to Helm.

12.how does helm handle secrets.
   Helm doesn't handle secrets directly but can deploy Kubernetes Secrets as part of your charts. You can
   define secrets in chart templates and Helm will create them in Kubernetes. For added security, you can use
   the helm-secrets plugin to encrypt secrets with tools like SOPS. Helm can also manage secrets through 
   ConfigMaps or environment variables. Best practices include using encrypted secrets and restricting access
   with RBAC.

13.explain helm dependencies.
   Helm dependencies allow you to include other charts as part of your application. You define them in the
   Chart.yaml file under the dependencies section. Use helm dependency update to fetch and install these
   dependencies. Helm automatically manages them when you install or upgrade your chart. This helps in 
   packaging and deploying applications that rely on other services like databases or message brokers.

14.how do you customize a hlem chart.
   You can customize a Helm chart by modifying its values.yaml file to change default settings like image names
   or replica counts. Alternatively, use the --set flag to override values during installation. You can also
   provide a custom values.yaml file with -f. For deeper customizations, modify the chart’s templates
   (e.g., deployment.yaml).

15.how do you ovverride values in a helm chart to customize it for a specific environment.

  To override values for a specific environment in Helm:

   1. Use a Custom values.yaml File:
      helm install my-release <chart-name> -f values-prod.yaml

   2. Use the --set Flag to override specific values:
      helm install my-release <chart-name> --set replicaCount=3 --set image.tag=prod

   3. Combine both methods for more flexibility:
      helm install my-release <chart-name> -f values-prod.yaml --set image.tag=latest

16.how do you handle helm chart versioning and best practices for release management.

   Chart Versioning:
   
   Increment Chart Version: Update the version field in the Chart.yaml file for every new release. 
                             Use Semantic Versioning (e.g., 1.2.3) to indicate changes:
   Major: Breaking changes.
   Minor: Backward-compatible features or fixes.
   Patch: Bug fixes.
  App Version: Separate from the chart version, the appVersion field indicates the version of the application
              being deployed.


   Release Versioning:
   Helm Release History: Helm maintains a version history for each release. When upgrading, Helm assigns a
                         new release revision number.
   Rolling Back: If an upgrade goes wrong, use helm rollback <release-name> <revision-number> to revert to
                  a previous version of the release.

   Best Practices for Release Management:

   Use Separate Environments: Maintain different Helm charts for development, staging, and production.
   Customize each environment using different values.yaml files.

   Use Helm Repositories: Store charts in repositories (e.g., public or private) for version control,
   enabling easy upgrades and rollbacks.

   Automate Releases: Implement CI/CD pipelines to automatically test, package, and deploy Helm charts to 
   Kubernetes environments.

   Document Changes: Keep clear change logs for each version of your charts to track changes in configurations, 
   features, or bug fixes.

17.how do you manage rolling update with helm.   

   Managing rolling updates with Helm is straightforward because Helm leverages Kubernetes' built-in deployment
   strategies. By default, Helm uses Kubernetes' RollingUpdate strategy for deployments, which ensures that
   updates are applied gradually without downtime.

   steps:
   1.Helm uses Kubernetes' RollingUpdate strategy by default for deployments.
   2.Trigger a rolling update by upgrading the Helm release (e.g., with a new image tag).
   3.Use helm rollback if needed to revert to a previous version.
   4.Monitor updates with kubectl rollout status.

18.how do you test a helm chart before deploying it.   
   
   steps:
   1.Lint the chart: helm lint <chart-directory>
   2.Render the chart templates: helm template <release-name> <chart-directory>
   3.Dry run the installation: helm install <release-name> <chart-directory> --dry-run
   4.Update dependencies: helm dependency update <chart-directory>
   5.Test the chart: helm test <release-name>

19.how would you manage helm charts in a multi-cluster k8s environment.   
   
   1.Centralized Helm Chart Repository:
     Host your Helm charts in a centralized repository (either public or private). This makes it easier to 
     manage charts across multiple clusters. You can use repositories like ChartMuseum, Harbor, or a
     cloud-based option like AWS S3 with Helm integration.

   2.Version Control for Charts:
      Use GitOps: Store Helm charts and configuration files in version-controlled repositories
      (e.g., GitHub, GitLab, Bitbucket). This provides consistency and allows for rollback capabilities.
      You can use ArgoCD or Flux for continuous deployment in multi-cluster environments.

      Example: Store Helm charts in Git and link your CI/CD pipeline for automatic deployments.

   3.Multi-cluster Deployment with Contexts:
     Use Multiple Contexts: Configure different Kubernetes cluster contexts in your kubeconfig file.
     Use Helm's --kube-context flag to specify which cluster to deploy to.

   4.Environment-Specific Configuration:
     Separate Configuration for Each Cluster: Use environment-specific values.yaml files for each cluster.
     You can customize configurations like replica count, resource limits, and image versions for each environment.

20.explain helm chart testing with helm test.
   helm test is a command used to run tests against a Helm release. This command allows you to validate your
   Helm chart deployment and ensure that the application is working as expected in the Kubernetes environment 
   after installation or upgrade.

